renewed Israeli bombardment of Gaza
after the ceasefire ended is worsening
the humanitarian crisis the US wants
Israel to do more to protect Palestinian
civilians what's the military's strategy
and can Israel learn from the
intelligence failures that led to
hamas's October attack this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello there and a warm welcome to the
program I'm Jonah Hall Israel has one of
the most advanced and well equipped
militaries in the world and yet on
October the 7th Hamas Fighters breached
the Gaza border fence infiltrated
Southern Israel and killed more than
1100 People Israel responded by
declaring war on Hamas its bomb campaign
has raised much of the Gaza Strip to the
ground and killed more than 15,000
Palestinians many in the International
Community have condemned the offensive
as disproportionate after a brief
ceasefire the bombardment has resumed
and appears to be expanding into the
densely populated southern part of the
Gaza Strip what is the Israeli
military's end game a year ago senior
government officials reportedly
dismissed intelligence pointing to an
impending attack by Hamas so who will be
held accountable for the unheeded
warnings and what will it take for the
Israeli government to call its operation
in Gaza a success will'll delve into all
this in a moment but first this report
from Finton
Monahan the attack by Hamas on Southern
Israel in October the 7th killed more
than 1100 people it's widely seen as a
major failure of Israeli intelligence a
report in the New York Times suggests
senior military and intelligence
officials were aware of what Hamas was
planning more than a year ago but
ignored the warning signs the Revelation
is piling more pressure on Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu he was widely criticized at
home for not publicly apologizing for
the security failure that led to the
Hamas offensive something his security
Chiefs did in the immediate aftermath of
the October attack his ratings have
plunged and he's faced repeated calls to
step
down Israel has lost faith in the Prime
Minister we cannot allow ourselves to
conduct an extended war with a prime
minister that the public does not
trust many analysts say netanyahu's
political future depends on how he
handles the war on Gaza so far Israeli
forces have killed more than 15,000
Palestinians most of them women and
children despite this Netanyahu has
reiterated that the objective in Gaza is
to wipe out
Hamas we swore and I swore to eliminate
Hamas nothing will stop us we will
continue this war until we achieve the
three goals to release all our abductees
to eliminate Hamas completely and to
ensure that Gaza will never again face
such a
threat but these goals seem incompatible
with any kind of push for a permanent
ceasefire the polls and hostilities in
Gaza lasted just a week Israel and Ally
the United States were quick to blame
Hamas it's also important to understand
why the pause came to an end um it came
to an end because of Hamas Hamas renegon
commitments had made while Hamas says
Israel never intended to extend the
ceasefire Beyond seven
days the Zionist regime Was preparing to
start its genocide and War again on Gaza
and its people yesterday we were in
meetings to extend the truth and we
offered many proposals the Israelis
didn't want any of it CER and and the
USA negotiations are continuing for
further humanitarian pauses and
exchanges of
captives Israel says Hamas is still
holding 137 people in Gaza but with the
Israeli government seemingly intent on
making up for its own failures on
October the 7th is there political will
for anything more than a temporary truce
Venton monan for Inside
[Music]
Story okay let's bring in our guests in
Tel Aviv Orin ziv is a journalist and
photographer at plus 972 magazine an
independent Israeli online news platform
in Sydney we've got Anthony Lowenstein
author of The Palestine laboratory a
book about Israel's arms and
surveillance industry and here in the
Qatari capital is Omar ashur a professor
of security and Military studies at the
Doha Institute for Graduate Studies and
a warm welcome to you all Anthony
lonstein I'd like to start with you and
this New York Times reporting that uh a
year beforehand Israel acquired plans
detailing an attack very similar to the
one that actually took place in fact
there were hints of just such an attack
dating all the way back to 2016 but that
a senior Military Intelligence officer
rebuffed the plans because he believed
Hamas simply didn't have the capacity so
it wasn't that they didn't know know
this was going to happen it was that
they didn't believe it was
possible I think that's correct I mean
obviously like any report at the moment
we have to take everything with a slight
degree of Sal not that the New York
Times report might be wrong but there's
so much we still don't know one of the
things that I discovered in my reporting
over the years before October 7th from
my book but certainly since is that
Israel I think over the years like the
us in many ways has believed that
technology technology on its own
surveillance Tech on its own will keep
them safe this belief somehow the 2.3
Palestinians in Gaza would be docile
would essentially accept their
imprisonment and yes it does appear that
Hamas was making plans in fact I've been
reading reports that there were many
Israelis on the Israeli side of the Gaza
border who had seen Hamas militants
rehearsing something and they were
reporting back that to the Israeli
officials and they essentially were
ignored including many Israeli women and
they were dismissed I think which sort
of goes to the heart I think often of a
very patriarchal society in many parts
of the Israeli intellig in terms of the
New York Times reporting the analyst who
signaled the greatest sense of threat
was also a
woman yes and I think from what I
understand this is based on my reporting
before October 7 but in general Israel
of course Prides itself on being gender
balanced and very openly um to women and
people of color and also for that matter
of gay soldiers but the the truth is
that when it comes to these kinds of
issues it seems that the messages were
being ignored because they believed
wrongly and fatally that somehow
sophisticated repressive Tech which they
then export around the world would
protect them which of course believes in
the end that Israel had this belief and
frankly many Israelis it wasn't just the
intelligence it was Israeli public for
years has believed that you could
imprison people literally down the road
from where they're living and somehow be
safe which of course is not true so in
the end this was less a failure of
intelligence the intelligence in fact
looks pretty good but more a failure of
judgment a failure of judgment but also
political hubris that Israel has
believed for decades and me to longest
occupation in modern times at the West
Bank and Gaza of course is under siege
for close to 20 years by Egypt and
Israel that somehow people would accept
that now none of that justifies what
Hamas did on October 7 by any means but
it certainly puts it in context that
there was this deluded belief and also
this idea somehow that you could have
surveillance technology repressive Tech
groans and also huge amounts of
Palestinians who were um being who
spying for Israel we don't know the
exact number in G including Hamas
members that somehow that would keep
Israelis safe and it's a delusion to
believe that orang Z let me bring you in
on the way all of this is likely to be
viewed
in Israel uh because presumably this
reporting will be repeated uh in Israeli
outlets and what do you think the public
will make of all this because of course
they will know that something terrible
went wrong they will know that they were
failed by the supposedly impregnable
Military Intelligence apparatus but this
is incendiary just to remind you of what
has been reported here the this 40-page
document called Jericho wall including
plans for a barrage of rockets at the
outset of an attack drones to knock out
the security cameras and Automated
machine guns along the border and gunmen
to pour into Israel on mass in
paragliders on motorcycles and on foot
all of which actually happened while the
government was looking the other
way yes I think inside israelit ongoing
discussion we've seen a few reports in
Israeli mainstream media of the
intelligence as anthonyy mentioned
brought from the border from the young
female Soldier serving as observers on
the border and we seeing a training of
Hamas in the last months or year and
they even mentioned that at some point H
from what they saw they understood the
training has ended because they saw
senior commanders that they haven't seen
before coming to kind of a ending
ceremony or event and they were passing
the
signals uh to more senior officers that
uh at some point even told them to stop
harassing them and that this is
imaginary so I think in general all the
Israeli public across the political
Spectrum Spectrum in Israel couldn't
imagine such an attack because people
thought the Army would have the
intelligence and as we see it wasn't
only a problem of intelligence but also
of understanding when this might happen
like having a specific Intelligence on
the weeks or months this could take
place now people across the isra
Republic are now busy with
u is it essentially the wrong moment for
this sort of discourse to happen I mean
people are Society is so focused now on
the captives uh it appears to be very
much behind the war in Gaza perhaps in
in search of Retribution for what has
happened or to make some sense of it is
it is it perhaps not yet the time to be
discussing who is to blame blame or will
this reporting start that
debate so this is debate debate is
happening specifically in the the public
that was protesting against Netanyahu
and overall his government his extreme
government was promoting before October
7 and it seems that a lot of the public
is feeling that netan will delay the war
and extend the war because he knows him
and his government know that in the
minute the war of officially ends of
course on the Israeli side on the Gaza
side it will take years or decades to to
to repair the damage but on the Israeli
side if Netanyahu officially ends the
war protest will start in days
immediately H and this is why many
people fear here in Israel that netan
will push on the war and would want an
endless operation because he know as you
said the chief of staff the head of of
Chinet and other officials already took
responsibility and kind of they didn't
say it officially but it's quite clear
they will resign When The War officially
ends on the Israeli side at the heart of
this failure of judgment this failure of
intelligence or military interpretation
if you like uh is a determination
apparently on the part of the military
and of ministers in the government that
Hamas simply lacked the capacity it's
been described as aspirational totally
imaginative these plans that emerged and
crucially that Hamas lacked the
intention as well Gaza was quiet the
problem seemed contained how on Earth
was Hamas able so successfully to mask
its ability and its intent and ensure
that Israel continued to look the other
way so first on the on the Israeli side
I I have to say like I'm not defending
unit 82 sou 8200 or or or anything like
that but um this
yeah intelligence unit did the
assessment yeah so it happened like okay
to Pearl Harbor the Americans fired the
first shot you know they they sunk the
the an assault Japanese submarine and
they were still surprised how did Hamas
manage to essentially pull the wall over
Tel aviv's eyes you can design it but I
can sit down here and design a perfect
uh textbook breach operation and this is
coming to to to your to your question so
you can well the breaching fundamentals
Hamas can you still hear me yes yes go
on we can hear you
fine yeah the uh the breaching
fundamentals Hamas executed a textbook
like and I'm not talking you know I'm
talking NATO grade like SRA suppress
obse secure secure reduce assault they
executed it like the textbook
multi-domain operation um um
with an Airborne Dimension with a ground
Dimension with a naval Dimension with a
cyber Dimension which is not that much
in the media but I I assume it will it
will be it will appear with an
electronic warfare Dimension and with an
intelligence Dimension so it was it
executed it as a perfect operation if
you so you can do this on paper but then
uh to actually do it in reality the
amount of planning training Logistics uh
men um mun
weapon systems then this is the issue
and I think this is this was the the the
uh the main failure on the on the
Israeli side is they they they they saw
this as a plan on paper which is great
you can get a textbook on how to create
a perfect Ambush and um and or or in
that case a large scale beaching
operation um and then you know and and
then leave it on the paper but then the
what how Hamas did that I think that was
a a very very long
process of um preparation I think some
of the documents that were captured goes
go back to October uh 2022 um the the
issuing of of orders u in terms of
training so we were talking about a year
but probably there was another year of
reaching this level so we're talking
probably about two years of preparation
um we're we're talking about because the
the the it was a Hamas Elite for example
it was a regimen siiz formation so we're
talking about in the range of 1,000 uh
Fighters those were the almost tier one
NATO grade um you know Fighters uh if
you looked at the rest behind them every
single mistake in the Infantry book was
done was was committed in a way so the
the level of training is very so I guess
they focused all the resources on a
particular
they were doing all of that they were
doing all of that essentially in plain
sight under the glare of int Israeli
intelligence and with politicians in
Israel believing that Hamas wanted to
get visas work visas to be able to work
inside Israeli territory that Hamas did
not want War uh all of which or and Z
leaves as you were saying there prime
minister Netanyahu looking intensely
vulnerable when the dust of war settles
uh here to what extent do you think and
you were alluding to it there that
pursuing this war is for Prim Minister
Netanyahu individually an attempt at
putting off the inevitable the
inevitable moment uh when public opinion
turns against him when he loses his job
and possibly worse first of all it's
important to mention that in netan and
the more extreme parts of his government
H until a week ago that the agreement uh
was signed a hostages hostages prisoner
deal was signed exactly eight days ago
it seems that his government has gave up
on the hostages and only the public
pressure the protest of the hostages
families and tens of thousands of
Israelis going to the street despite the
the sirens and the rockets that were
fired from time to time into Center
Israel the protest and the actions of
the families and their supporters LED
this government to agree to this deal
because we heard netan saying a few
times that eliminating Hamas and we can
talk about this target later and
returning the hostages is equally
important and according to different
reports we've seen that already in the
first days of the war Hamas offered a
deal of the Israeli and the Israeli
children and women in exchange of the
female Palestinian prisoner 30 something
Palestinian prisoners and the
Palestinian minors in Israeli prisons
and the government rejected this deal
open a war to satisfy the sense of
Revenge in the Israeli public and to
show they're doing something and after a
month on the Israel media Israeli media
figures and the government is claiming
that the military
efforts ER allow this deal to happen in
better conditions to Israel which I
disagree so I think already we seeing
the the public pressure helping here to
achieve this deal and the government to
to agree to ceasefire under the
condition to renew the war this is
something SM and and Ben and other
minister demanded that the ceasefire
will not be too long in their opinion
and I think now slowly we will see
bigger parts of the public going to
protest directly against n we already
seen some of the people some of the
families of the victims killed and
murder on October seven protesting in
front of the parliament we've seen a
small protests in Tel Aviv and Jerusalem
but I believe as as this go on and more
people in the public will realize that
the net is really not setting goals to
this war you know talking generally
about eliminating Hamas but not talking
how to do it and more importantly not
talking what will happen on the day
after in Gaza we've
seen y laid had of the opposition Israel
publishing a document today talking
about the day after in Gaza talking
about International
interference there and other points but
more important he's saying netan is not
offering anything and it's quite clear
that under his extreme government no
solution is acceptable than maybe just
settling and staying Gaza as some of the
ministers and and other right-wing
Parliament members declared well well
speaking of the day after and speaking
of clear goals I mean one of them is to
protect Israel from any future threat
from Gaza Anthony lonstein bombing Gaza
to to the ground doesn't achieve that
does it uh there need to be other ways
intelligence driven uh and led methods
of protecting Israel from whatever
threat it perceives to exist in Gaza
Beyond this
War I think that's right and it's
interesting I note in the last 24 hours
in har the Israeli newspaper there were
comments that many of the Arab states
who publicly have been very critical of
Israel and of course many of them in the
last years have signed So-Cal
normalization deals with Israel are
saying privately according to this
report that in fact they'd be happy for
Hamas to be militarily defeated assuming
that's even possible because they regard
Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood as a
threat to themselves in their own
countries wherever it may be in the Arab
world look ultimately there is no
military solution here Israel has
currently destroyed the northern part of
Gaza they seem to be moving into
destroying the southern part and of
course that can only lead to one
conclusion which is that the idea
ultimately is to make it uninhabitable
for the vast majority of Palestinians
there and I see in the last 24 hours
more reports in the Israeli press
talking about how elements within
netanyahu's government their Vision if
you can call it that is that is to have
as few Palestinians as possible left at
the end of this doesn't mean they're
going to kill all of them it just means
that to potentially find ways to remove
them Egypt Jordan Lebanon now those
Nations the moment have not accepted the
idea of taking in Palestinians in sort
of Quasi 10 cities that has not happened
yet despite the fact that I know Israel
has attempted to bribe is Egypt in huge
amounts of money to take in lots of
Palestinians in the SI in fact a report
in the last 24 hours suggests Israel
even imagined trying to get Palestinians
out of Gaza via sea in the Mediterranean
I mean kind of crazy ideas in a way but
that's the vision here if you can call
it that there is no vision or beyond
what the US is pushing which is a
Palestinian Authority which is deeply
corrupt and unpopular in the West Bank I
mean there is no solution here without
actually engaging Palestinians and
Israelis in dialogue which so far no one
serious seems to want to do indeed
outlandish ideas Omar asure what do you
imagine
represents victory for Israel in Gaza
when will enough be enough well it's uh
it's the objective
uh for them that declared as well is to
destroy the to destroy Hamas basically
you know militarily and politically and
if that objective is um there's a lot of
civilians that are going to uh be killed
um um to to get to that
objective uh they will consider them
collateral damage they will not really
um stop at that point unless there's
like
significant uh political iCal pressure
from the International Community from
the US specifically and from others um
but but the objective
is degrade and Destroy Hamas uh probably
also take over Gaza City I don't know
what it's it's unclear to me the end
game I don't I don't think it's clear
for the for the isra government you know
the the the end game is there a big
question this notion of destroying Hamas
and I'll throw this to you or if this
notion of destroying Hamas uh I mean on
the face of it looks fanciful in the
sense that what struck me this week in
the release of Palestinian prisoners on
the occupied West Bank was the number of
Hamas flags that were flying the number
of prisoners and prisoners families who
thanked quote the resistance meaning
Hamas the idea that there are thousands
of Orphans uh in Gaza now who will grow
up with hatred resentment and revenge in
their hearts the idea of getting rid of
Hamas M seems outright
fanciful does that idea penetrate at all
in
Israel I think this idea of eliminating
Hamas at least in Gaza is something that
a vast majority of the Israeli public
agree on if and it's because it's
something that is promoted by the media
and politicians from all the political
Spectrum Without Really explaining that
ideology it's not something that is so
easy to to eliminate and specifically
not mentioning that Israeli government
and specifically benam Nan was
strengthening Hamas Through The Years by
because it was as as they themselves
said it was good for them that Hamas is
ruling Gaza and gives them a reason not
to to push further to and it was an
excuse not to to promote any political
or diplomatic solution and separate
between the West Bank and Hamas as you
said by releasing the prisoner I'm not
sure this is done intentionally of
course Kamas is gaining a lot of power
in the West Bank and in East Jerusalem
we're seeing people thanking them of
course I saw it personally being in East
Jerusalem last week with the prisoners
released and as the civilian death toll
escalates again I want to ask you each
very briefly what you think will make
this stop Anthony Lowenstein will it be
when Israel feels it has reasserted
itself as a power to be feared
and that's what their intention is the
only thing that can stop this is America
it really is as simple as that and of
course at the moment America has no
intention of doing so but the only Power
that can do so is Biden getting on the
phone and stopping this no other
international power can do that and I
fear that that is not on the agenda at
the moment despite the need for it to
happen because America is still sending
weapons to Israel as we speak including
bunker busting bombs so this is America
on the one hand talks about bringing
some kind of reduction in civilian
casualties that's the public message
where privately they're sending many
more weapons which is what really
matters in the end tragically R and ziv
will it be when Israeli public opinion
decides that enough killing of civilians
in Gaza is enough and that this is one
man's war and needs to end he the
Israeli public is not really looking on
what's happening in Gaza there really
mainstream media is not really bringing
the images the interviews the the things
we see on your Channel and other
International channels so the public is
not really aware to the amount of
Destruction and Devastation in Gaza
unfortunately not yet Perhaps and and
and they're not aware of all the the
international reactions to that and
unfortunately I'm saying it very sadly I
think for the Israeli public with the
sense of re revenge and sadness and with
the the statements for politician
nothing will be enough so I I think as
Anthony said this is about International
pressure and not about the isra public
no space then for for for the suffering
of gazin I understand I'm sorry we've
got to move on omaru finally last word
to you will it be when Hamas gives up it
could be if uh we don't know how much is
left in hamas's arsenal of men weapons
and Munitions uh and tunnels we but we
know it's Gaza is under siege under
double Siege one from around Gaza and
one around the North and probably there
will be a third one around Gaza City so
we we
it could be but it also could be if if
as my colleagues said International
pressures on one end uh change in the
public opinion on the other that affects
the decision makers uh determination but
also the the the casualties you know
Israel is very sensitive to casualties
and we're talking now about a fig
figures that exceed 15 years of war in
South Lebanon 1985 to 2000 Israel lost
about 300 soldiers and now we're north
of uh
360 um also casualties the wounded the
PS the the missing the the the deserters
and so on so these all these all are out
of uh the combat area okay we'll have to
wrap it up there many thanks for your
thoughts let me thank all of my guests
for a spirited discussion or ziv in Tel
Aviv Antony lene in Sydney and Omar
ashure here in Doha and thank you too
for watching you can see the program
again any Time by visiting our website
aljazeera.com and for further discussion
go to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ Inside
Story you can also join the conversation
on X our handle is at AJ insid story
from me Jonah Hull and the whole team
here bye for
now